Since you mentioned combining two rope
rope lengths, what's your favorite knot?
>> Oh.
>> Oh my god. I was gonna ask that same
question, but I was saving it for the
end. I literally have it written down
here. [laughter] That's so funny.
>> Sorry. I just thought, you know, you
mentioned combining two roses.
>> Dude, we've been we've been doing this
for so long.
>> We always think about the same.
>> We're we're morphing into the same
person, I guess. [music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Wisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, you know what's something I've
been thinking a lot about lately,
especially like this year, just sort of
like something on my mind.
>> Well, probably on everyone's mind
actually. It's not not just me. is just
like the extraordinary amount of rope it
must have taken for whailing expeditions
in the mid9th century as uh as depicted
in a story such as uh Moby Dick and
others. Like just think about how much
rope that required.
>> Is this whole episode an excuse for you
to talk about Moby Dick?
>> It's not. But it is true.
>> But it is.
>> No, no, it's genuinely true. You know
one thing I learned actually in the
course of researching this particular
topic which happens to be rope. Uh the
whale that apparently inspired Moby Dick
was called Mocha Dick and also Dick was
basically you know like saying Joe back
then every Tom Dick and Harry right you
hear that. So really the Moby Dick whale
was Mocha Joe.
>> Oh that's right. You know it's funny
when uh I used to go to a coffee shop in
Bradboro Vermont name Mocha Joe's.
>> Ah did it have a whailing theme? It
didn't. But that's I like missed
opportunity.
>> I like the way you did that. Apparently,
from what I understand, I I also at one
point went down this like where did this
name come from?
>> I think Dick is in Moby Dick even then
carried the sort of contemporary
connotations. Oh, really? Yeah. It was
like sort of like tough.
>> He was a jerk whale. No, like sort of
like masculine like you know like even
that it was sort of like that it even
back then sort of was this sort of that
was a masculine name for reasons that
one would associate it.
>> I'm I'm not going to say anything else
>> there. Well, that's fine. Anyway, but
it's interesting to think you know I you
know we do these uh you think about the
history of technologies etc. We one of
our was you know we did a episode on the
history of nails and how crucial that
was to the economy and you think like
here is this one technological
breakthrough some like unlock and then
it opens up all of these kinds of
things. So whales were very important
for like whale oil and candles etc. But
like what were the technologies that
preceded whale whale whaling and you
literally could not do it and of course
that's just one example but there are
all kinds of technologies things that
you do that are economically productive.
I remember in school we learned about
like simple machines like the pulley. Oh
yeah. And stuff like that. But you can't
have a pulley without rope.
>> That's true.
>> No, for real. Like we learned about the
pulley when I was in elementary school,
but no one bothered mentioning when I
was in elementary school that the pulley
would have been useless technology
without rope to pull.
>> But the rope itself is the technology
behind the technology. It's this one's
an interesting one because I think when
when you say the word rope, people think
of something, you know, old-fashioned
like rope is lindy, just a bundle of
cords, right? But actually, as we are
about to discuss, there have been lots
of technological breakthroughs in both
the way rope is made and also the way
rope is designed.
>> Totally. Well, I'm very excited to say
we do in fact have the perfect guest,
someone I've wanted to speak to for uh
since last summer, I think, when I uh
came across his work. We're going to be
speaking with Tim Queenie. He is the
author of the recent book Rope, how a
bundle of twisted fibers became the
backbone of civilization. Quite a bold
claim there, Tim. [laughter]
>> Hi guys. Thanks to for having me on.
Yeah, that's it's a bold claim, but uh
you know that that's the why you have to
buy the book and read it. It backs back
it up. What is rope?
>> No, seriously, what what makes something
rope?
>> Well, that's a good question. And and uh
you can you can people have asked me how
you define rope, but but for this book,
I defined rope uh in a very broad sense
from everything down from cordage uh
which is thin small rope or or twine or
if you want to call it that up to uh
heavyduty uh wire rope. So made of of
metal. So that it's all rope as far as
I'm concerned and uh and that's sort of
how I went in. But basically rope is is
twisted fibers uh that are then used to
to accomplish work.
>> I definitely want to talk about space
rope later on or space elevators because
that's something I was completely
unaware of.
>> But before we do just on the book
itself. So I'm aware that these single
topic books have become something of a
phenomenon. So you have people talk
explaining the history of human
development through the medium of salt
or
>> the container box or fish cod or
whatever. But what does rope actually
say about civilization or human
development that other single object
stories maybe miss?
>> Well, of course rope as as we've already
just talked about is made up of fibers.
There little strands of fiber. And um if
you want to talk about it in sort of a
thematic way um uh rope is each one of
those individual fibers can't do much on
its own. But uh if you twist them all
together uh you can now you have a tool
that's immensely useful. And it's sort
of like the way uh a single person can't
do all that much on their own. But
people working together in groups can
accomplish great things. And they often
accomplish those great things down
through history using rope.
>> So what is it about fiber? So you twist
them together. I mean I I like this is
going to sound dumb, but I really never
like thought about it before even like
paid attention. But what is it about the
property of a strand, the property of a
fiber, or even the property of a long
like metal rod such that when you twist
them together, it becomes very
loadbearing?
>> It's a combination of friction,
[clears throat]
>> especially with um especially with
fibers. Uh it's a combination of
friction, twist, and something you could
you could call the helix effect. Um the
the the friction of course is just the
individual fibers as they're twisted
together, they're rubbing up against
each other and engaging those little all
the little nooks and crannies of the
fiber, engaging with other nooks and
crannies on other fibers. And so there's
that friction that's stopping it and a
certain amount of sort of physical
locking in that's that's going on that's
stopping them from sliding past each
other. But then but then you twist it
and uh by twisting them you're
re-engaging those fibers in a new way
and uh even more deeply. And then
finally uh and we can go into more about
rope twist and how that works. But
finally, the last thing is is what you
might call the helix effect. Was it was
which is if you were to take a a rope
and to wrap it around your arm.
>> For those for listeners, you should go
over to the YouTube because Tim is
actually wrapping a rope around his arm.
It looks a little bit like a tilin, but
um but uh yeah, tell us what tell us
what's going on here for the especially
for those who are just listening.
>> So, I'm not so I'm just I'm just
wrapping this rope around my arm and I'm
not I'm not actually uh it's hard to
maybe
>> Yeah, we can see it. Yeah. Um, I'm not
actually uh nailing this to my arm or or
gluing it to my arm or uh or riveting it
to my arm, but I'm just putting it on my
arm. And then if you can't see maybe too
well here, but if I pull it on the same
axis on which I've wrapped it around my
arm, it stays. I'm I've literally
literally done nothing to make this rope
stay other than the fact that it's
wrapped around my arm. So what's
actually happening here is you have this
helix of rope that when you pull on it
on that on that same axis on which it
was twisted it the helix collapses and u
you might uh remember those uh party
toys you got when you were a kid
>> where you stick your fingers on both
ends and and pull on them and the finger
so-called finger trap and what happens
is is those toys are made up of a whole
series of of helixes and when you pull
on them all the helixes collapse and
they tighten up. And that's what happens
with rope with uh multiple strand rope.
This rope I have right here is actually
made of jute and it's that's a natural
fiber. And this is actually a four
strand rope. Um I don't know if you can
see the four strands here.
>> Listeners got to watch this on YouTube.
This is so much better as a video than
just audio because you can see all the
jute, right?
>> The four strands. Uh those those strands
and most rope all through history has
been three strand rope. Um, and I I'll
talk about why that is in a second, but
the the strands and when you pull on
them, the strands all do that helix
effect. The one strand wraps is wrapped
around the other two three strands and
it's collapsing down on the other three
and so on and so on all with all four
strands. They're all collapsing around
each other. And that's what makes it
incredibly strong is this helix effect.
and and and that was actually um told to
me by the by a German engineer who uh
works in the industry and uh he's uh
he's so well known that he's called the
the the pope of rope and
>> are there rope celebrities?
>> Oh, we should have had him on instead.
[laughter]
>> Yeah. Yeah, he's he's the real
celebrity, but he told me about the this
helix effect. And and so it's th really
those three things, the the friction,
the twisting, and then the the helix
effect that that causes three strand
rope to work so well. And and three
strand of course works is most commonly
made because uh it's the least number of
strands you can use to have this helix
effect. So it's sort of the most
economical way to get the helix effect
at its maximum without having to add
more strands, which of course can add
cost. So, so three strand is the way to
go.
>> So, we're talking about the basic design
of rope. Walk us through, I guess, the
technological breakthroughs when it
comes to designing rope. Was there a
moment, you know, when the fourth cord
was added or I don't know, they were
twisted in a different way where someone
was like, "Aha, I have invented the
better rope that will now allow us to
accomplish some great thing."
Well, that's that's really good question
that I can't answer. And the reason why
we can't answer that is because rope is
such an ancient human tool that we just
don't know when the first rope the first
multistrand rope was was developed and
and made. Um there the f the oldest rope
that's ever been found is 50,000 years
old. Uh, and that's a piece of cordage
that was found on the bottom of a flint
flake in a u in a cave in southeastern
France. And uh and it was twisted by a
uh a Neanderthal person um 50,000 years
ago. Uh and there may be indeed have
been rope much older than that that was
that was manufactured. But the problem
with rope, natural fiber rope, is that
it's made of pro um plant uh material
and it uh it tends to rot away. So we uh
there may be 70,000 year old rope that
was made, but we just we don't know. One
thing that really struck me, and you
said this in your book, but you know,
these days you invent a new technology,
it feels like in a year later it's
obsolete, right? And this pace seems to
be accelerating. And one thing that I
really appreciated from your book is
that in the old days once a new
technological innovation would come
around like maybe like once every couple
hundred thousand years or a million. I
think you make the point that um Homo
erectus who I guess were our uncles or
something like that basically had one
invention the handax in a million and a
half years they basically figured out
one thing. Like technological
revolutions uh were pretty slow back in
the old days.
>> Yeah, that's right. the the handax which
um from what I understand the people
I've talked to the the there still
archaeologists still aren't completely
sure what those things were were used
for. There were so many of those around
and that was they were used for such a
long time and uh it's quite possible
that the in my book I talk about the
handaxs and stone tools happening before
rope but it's quite possible that they
were around contemporaneously with rope
but we have that issue of it them
rotting away but once you've developed
this multistrand rope it now become has
all these great uses that uh that can
that can be it can be put to probably
the the biggest use for uh uh early
peoples was just uh the ability to
organize your stuff. You can uh you can
uh tie things together in bundles, which
sounds maybe a little simplistic for us,
but uh we do the same thing in lots of
other ways. We just keep our stuff
organized and and they had to do the
same thing. And so rope was just a great
uh tool for that in addition to to uh
using it for domesticated animals and
being able to keep them in place so they
don't run off and lots of other things.
If I could fast forward about 50,000
years or so, um, you know, Joe started
this conversation talking about the
importance of rope when it comes to
whailing.
>> And if you think about a time period
like the 1800s, sort of marked by the
expansion of the British Empire, lots of
ships sailing around, all covered in
rope in one way or another.
>> Lots of ships sailing around. That's
like a good description of much of all
history. [laughter]
>> I guess that's true. All right, but you
know, the kind of ships. I mean,
>> how important was being able to
manufacture rope at a sort of industrial
scale uh in the 1800s? Cuz I mean, we're
talking about a lot of rope. I think you
have a stat in your book about how much
rope it took just to, you know, get a
whale. And it was a lot.
>> Yeah. The the whaling ships would carry
more than 10,000 feet of rope uh just
for use on board the the the whale boats
that went out to actually hunt the
whales. not not even discussing all the
other uses that rope is put to on a
sailing ship. And as you point out, a
sailing ship uh which was the premier
technology for hundreds of years for
crossing oceans is uh absolutely
dependent upon rope uh both for the
standing rigging which help holds the
masts up and the the running rigging
which controls the uh controls the
sails. Going all the way back to the
Egyptians uh they had the exact same
issue. They had to have rope to uh to
keep their um keep their boats under
control and for them to keep the the
masts from falling down. And and if I
could just go back for a second to the
Egyptians uh very interestingly
different way of building ships than the
way a ship was built for example for a
whailing ship in the 19th century. the
sort of the the the uh way of building
ships in the western world is to you you
build a a um you put down a keel then
you have ribs that's that are 90 90
degrees to that keel and then you have
planks which cover the ribs and now you
have your hull but the Egyptians
actually did it in a completely
different way and other cultures as well
it wasn't just the Egyptians they
actually stitched their boats together
they uh took the planks and they cut
these V-shaped grooves in the plank
planks and they actually uh uh actually
uh threaded rope through these V-shaped
grooves and to either end of the of the
collection of planks and then tightened
them up. And then they had a uh they had
a hull and they would put ribs in after
they they had uh stitched these boats
together, but the ribs were there just
as in in addition to the rope to hold
the uh the planks together. So rope is
absolutely essential for for a boat even
to even to float. So that was that's
pretty amazing. As I said, it wasn't
just the Egyptians, but also Arab uh a
lot of Arab boat building was done in a
similar fashion with stitched boats. Uh
but going back to the the era of uh the
age of sail, uh you just they needed
just tens of thousands of feet of rope
to uh to equip these vessels. And as you
point out that the uh the when you have
that much rope required you it ceases to
be a cottage industry and the whole
process becomes industrialized.
>> And the the people who really kicked
this off were were the British with the
um with their need to keep their large
Royal Navy establishment going at all
times and keep all these ships um that
hundreds of ships uh um available to go
to sea. So, uh, they had a series of
dockyards where they manufactured rope
and, uh, along with other things. And
some, uh, maritime historians say that
it really was the the, uh, Royal Navy
that kicked off the industrial
revolution because the whole process
really needed to be industrialized to,
uh, to make all this rope.
>> Let's talk more about that. Actually, I
Tracy, I I jokingly said, "Oh, ships
floating around." But no this is really
a key point here which is that it's it
is and to the the definition of the book
how became the backbone how rope became
the backbone of civilization. It is hard
to imagine civilization without a lot of
boats and it is hard to imp literally
impossible to imagine sailboats of
various sizes without ropes of various
things. Was there a you know in steel
they talk about like the Bessemer
process suddenly like some sort of
unlock for steel existed before the
Bessemer process but then that unlock a
significant expansion. Was there some
breakthrough that allowed for rope to go
from one of these things that oh let's
twist some plant fibers with our hands
maybe wrap them around something to
something that could be truly produced
at industrial scale.
>> I don't think that there's any one event
that like that. Uh it was kind of a
continuous process much like rope itself
uh that went from rope being made uh
outdoors in these rope yards where they
would twist the rope in because you need
a lot of space to do all this twisting u
to uh an indoor activity because they it
no they no longer could take the time
off uh for when it uh snowed and rained.
They you needed to make rope every day
to to meet the needs as I said of
something like the Royal Navy. uh you
needed to to really produce rope on a
massive scale and the and the the needs
of something like a large sailing ship
where you need to have some very long
ropes. Specifically, the longest rope
being the rope the anchor road or the
the rope that you tie your anchor to so
you can anchor in deep water. Um that
had to be u 742t
long. Uh, and so in order to make a 742
ft long, in the last part of the process
of making rope, when you're putting the
strands together, the the rope actually
gets shorter because you're twisting it
and the whole process gets shorter, but
you have to start out with thousand foot
long strands that you're twisting
together to make the final rope that uh
that ends up being the 740 ft long. So,
so you need a huge building to do this.
And so these rope walks that were built
at the in the various dockyards and
around the world. It wasn't just the
British who were doing this. They were
built in the US and and all the all
maritime nations were doing this and
even non-maritime nations because you
needed rope for other things. But uh
these dockyards uh these rope walks, I'm
sorry, really were the were the thing
that industrialized the process and
allowed you to make very long very big
ropes. Can you talk to us on that note
about the supply chain that created
rope? So I I guess rope in the 1800s was
made out of jute or hemp or something
like that. Where did that material come
from and how did it get to the docky
yards in a place like London?
>> Yeah, that's a great question because uh
it actually was a strategic material.
There was something called naval stores.
The British called them naval stores
that which was pitch from pine to use
for waterproofing and then uh the actual
pine trees themselves, the trunks to use
for masts. And then finally uh the hemp
that was used to make rope because most
of the rope made in the during the age
of sale was made from hemp fibers
because it actually makes um
spectacularly good rope. uh because you
can grow these uh hemp plants very very
tall and uh the fibers that you can
strip out of them are very long and the
longer the fiber the the better for the
rope the stronger the rope is. Uh yeah.
So these were these were strategic
materials that the Royal Navy for
example was always looking uh towards
its supply of these materials. When the
US was uh a colony of of Great Britain,
the uh parliament actually passed a law
um that required uh or asked or prompted
uh American uh farmers to grow hemp
plants plants so they could the hemp
fiber could be sent back to uh to
Britain for use in making rope. Uh the
other the other really the largest uh
supplier of hemp was actually um from
Russia from Ukraine the area of the
Ukraine and uh that's where mo Britain
got most of of its hemp from and
amazingly one of the reasons why uh
Napoleon for example invaded uh Russia
in 1812 was to there were a number of
reasons but one reason was to cut off
the hemp supply of uh to to the British
Royal Navy so then he could finally get
around to invading uh invading Britain
which he failed to do. It's interesting
they made the colonists
send back the uh hemp fiber back to
Britain preserving the the value at you
know the the poor colonists just had to
ship raw commodities while the uh rope
yards in Britain got to actually do the
premium higherend value ad very common
pattern in history. talk us a little bit
more, you know, uh about um she
obviously when in a whailing expedition
there's the sail, right? And then
there's that, you know, apparently uh in
in Moby Dick, they talk about although
apparently he doesn't use the term like
they called it the Nantucket sleigh ride
after you get the hook in the whale and
then the whales drag your boats and then
there's the there you're like wetting
someone has to pour water on the rope so
that it's not burning their hands. talk
to us about like how big of a
breakthrough that was in terms of uh
acquiring this very important uh fuel.
>> Yeah. Yeah. The uh the whalers of course
whaling started out with just um
attacking whales from the from the
shore. But uh as those whales were used
up the the these whaling ships had to go
farther and farther a field to find
whales to to to harvest. And uh yeah,
the the the rope uh was absolutely
essential. The rope had to hold when
after they sunk in that uh that harpoon.
And the famous Nantucket sleigh ride
when the whales um going along the
surface uh and dragging the boat behind
it. Um the one that's really dangerous
though is if the whale decides to sound
or or dive,
>> right?
>> Uh because then the boat has to make
sure that they have enough rope on board
to uh to take it take to let out enough
ropes. so that they're not dragged
underwater. And sometimes whale boats
that had were following a big whale, the
other whale boats would get near them
and they would actually uh combine two
lengths of rope that they each had in
their tubs, rope tubs, so that just to
to prevent the the whale from uh from
sounding and actually dragging the boat
under.
>> Since you mentioned combining two rope
rope lengths, what's your favorite knot
>> that Oh.
>> Oh my god. I was going to ask that same
question, but I was saving it for the
end. I literally have it written down
here. That's [laughter] so funny.
>> Sorry. I just thought, you know, you
mentioned combining two ropes.
>> Dude, we've been we've been doing this
for so long.
>> We always think about the same.
[laughter]
>> We're we're morphing into the same
person, I guess.
>> But let's just do it. What's your
favorite knot?
>> Well, actually, but it's interestingly
enough, my my editor wanted to put a
knot on the cover initially, but we we
realized
>> Tracy just showed me on her computer.
She really did write down word for word.
She was going to ask, "What's your
favorite knot?" But I I gazumped her. I
I asked it in the middle even though she
was saving it for the end. So
>> this this is for both.
>> Well, we uh we were going to put a knot
on the idea was came up to put a knot on
the cover, but I I said that this is
actually not a knot book because
[laughter] I I I can't uh I can't uh
actually take credit for being a knot
expert. I mean,
>> but you must have one. Let's go.
>> But I do have a number of good of knots
that I like. And um the one that's sort
of the most fun to tie is the is the
flying bowlan. The bowlan that forms in
midair.
>> Um but uh it's also called a tugboat
bowl and it's great. It's it's a very
useful knot to make at at the last
minute if you need to make a make a
bowlan or or a loop at the end of a
rope. You can actually make it very
quickly. Um and uh then you can t throw
it around a a ballard or something uh if
you're on a tugboat and maybe save the
boat. I don't know. But, uh, yeah,
that's a that's a that's a fun one to to
show off. I don't know if I can do it
here in this closed space. It's I don't
know. I do need a bit of space. I know.
Make the knot.
>> Yeah. Let's see. Let's see. While you're
doing it, While you're doing it, Tracy,
do you have a favorite knot?
>> No.
>> I do.
>> Like, I'm proud that I can tie my shoes.
That's
>> I have to I can't tie my shoes, but you
know what my favorite knot is? Someone
should. A monkeykey's fist. Do you know
that one?
>> No.
>> Do you know what a monkeykey's fist is,
Tim?
>> Oh, sure. Absolutely. That's for
throwing for a throwing line.
>> Yeah. You can like make this ball at the
end of the rope and then you can like
put it through a loop and it won't like
go through and it's very hard to
>> What would you use that for?
>> Well, if you wanted to like put it if
you were pulling on something and you
wanted to like put it through a loop and
you didn't want the rope to slide
through a loop like you want to get to
the end so you could make sure it's
there. Also, it's re basically
impossible to untie from what I in my
experience. Tim is currently
>> Let's see if this works. I usually need
even more space than this, but
>> uh
>> let's see if we can get this to work.
>> Oh, no.
>> Try one more time.
>> Didn't work.
>> Well, that's it right there.
>> Oh, there you go.
>> Even though I I tied my microphone cord.
[laughter]
>> It's through my microphone. too much
rope.
>> Actually, that's a nice seg into um the
next thing I wanted to ask about, which
is rope in different materials. So, we
talked a little bit about, you know, may
maybe there was breakthrough in terms of
design and the way you're twisting
cords. We don't really know because it
was all organic material and it's
decayed. But we do know that rope kind
of leapt from jute um natural fibers to
metals to steel and things like that.
Talk to us about how important that was
when it comes to I guess technological
advancement in rope.
>> Yeah. the uh there was a British I'm
sorry German engineer in the Harts
Mountains in the mining region of the
Harts Mountains this fellow named
William Albert and he uh he noticed
realized and knew that that uh a lot of
the the rope that they were using um to
haul materials up through mines uh up
through the shafts of mines were was was
corroding and breaking the natural fiber
rope and they would you also use chains
but the problem with the chain is that
when one link corrods and breaks the
entire chain is fails and the material
falls.
>> But he thought, what if I actually used
iron and I used strips of iron, lengths
of iron and I twisted it together just
like it was if as if it was hemp uh into
uh into multistranded rope. And he did
that and it worked worked spectacularly.
And one of the reasons why it works is
because even if you lose one strand, if
one strand breaks, it the entire rope is
doesn't fail. It has a very uh easy
failure mode where it takes multiple
strands to break for the the wire rope
to fail. So it was very useful in that
industrial setting. And there was
another German engineer who immigrated
to the US um and his uh name was John
Robling. and he started he actually read
there's actually a piece that uh William
Albert wrote uh in a journal uh uh an
industrial journal that John Robling
read and what became very interested in
making his own wire rope which he
started doing and his wire rope was
superior um and in the 18 uh 1840s and
they uh he started a business of making
wire rope and then he got into m
designing um suspension bridges and um
of course he and his son Washington
Robing were responsible for the Brooklyn
Bridge all made up with wire rope.
>> Yeah, that's wild. Like I you know
honestly it wasn't until I read your
book that it like dawned on me like
that's rope that's the same thing. I
mean granted the material is different
but that fundamental idea of the
strength through uh coil or the strength
through twisting is this that gave us
the Brooklyn Bridge.
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> You end your book with like the future
of rope so to speak and the idea like
maybe rope could one day give us an
elevator into space.
>> Space rope.
>> Yeah. Can you explain what that's all
about?
>> Space elevator. Yeah. It's great.
Whenever I give a talk, I always ask,
"How many people here have ever heard of
a space elevator?" And never more than a
quarter of them raised their hands. Um,
it's actually I'm surprised I I thought
more people knew about it, but it's uh
it's actually a a physics idea that goes
back to the to the 19th century. Um, the
idea being that uh the Earth rotates at
uh any point on the equator of the Earth
is moving at 900 miles an hour. So, uh,
if you were to attach something to the
Earth and, uh, attach a tether to the
Earth and then you were to extend that
tether out into space with a weight on
the end 100,000 kilometers out, then,
um, what would happen would be, of
course, it'd be the same as if you uh,
took a piece of rope like this and I
attached a rock on the end of the rope
and I twirled around in a circle. What
would happen to the rope? The rope would
go really tight as it was preventing
that rock from flying away. So the exact
same effect happens here as the earth
rotates the the weight at way out in
space wants to fly off into the distance
and the tether is preventing it from
doing that. And in the process that
tether becomes bar tight as it was made
of uh steel. And once you have that you
can then put a crawler that uh uses uh
friction wheels on that that tether and
it can crawl up that tether up to um say
23,000 mi high which is geocynchronous
orbit. and uh you open the doors to your
um to your crawler and push the
satellite out, a satellite you may have
on board, push it out and at 23,000 mi
high, it's now in geocynchronous orbit.
Um so you can put things into orbit
without using rockets. Uh you could also
use this um this device to send that
crawler all the way to the end of the
tether at 100,000 kilometers out. And
that tether, the end of that tether is
spi is whipping around at very high
speed because it has to keep up with it
has to scribe a much larger circle. Oh
yeah, the than the circle of the of the
equator. So it's moving very fast uh th
you know 17,000 m an hour. you can uh
bring something up to the top of that
and as you if you want to send something
to the moon as the tether swings around
to when it hits the right angle you
release it and it goes flying toward the
moon uh without any need for rocketry.
So it's an amazing um device that up to
now hasn't been built because of the one
limiting factor which is how do you
build a tether that's strong enough to
do the job. Oh yeah, this was going to
be my next question, which is you you
actually in the book seem quite bullish
on the space elevator idea and if you go
and look up photos of it, it looks very
sci-fi, right? It it looks kind of out
there, but realistically, do you think
this is going to happen like sometime in
our lifetimes?
>> Well, I did I did speak with two
gentlemen who were very who are very
bullish about this. um one a guy named
Pete Swan who's a former NASA sc rocket
scientist um and he was at one point the
the head of the international uh space
elevator consortium I don't know if you
knew there was such a thing
>> a consortium for everything huh
>> yes and uh and so he and then a fellow
named Adrien Nixon who is u at the
associated with the University of
Manchester in England and they are both
very bullish about this idea that it can
be done and that it will be done soon.
Um, in fact, Pete Swan just he just left
his position at with the International
Space Elevator Consortium and he's
starting up a company and he said,
"We're going to go out and build this
sucker."
>> And the reason why they it can do this,
if I could just go on for a second, is
there's this material called graphine
and uh it's a very strange material and
the way it's made is very strange. Uh
but it's a a very it's basically carbon
that's uses uh gaseous uh depositation
onto a copper substrate and when it when
you you when the conditions are right it
actually forms these hexagonal rings
that are all interconnected and and
those uh interconnected hexagonal rings
have the use the strongest bond known
known in nature and and that uh and that
so that's but that's only one atom one
atom layer thick. Then you do it again,
deposit it again and another layer forms
and then another and another and you can
go to 26,000
layers as uh as Adrien Nixon told me
about the um and they uh that's this
this tether is incredibly strong. I mean
it's unbelievably strong. You need
something that's capable of 90 gigap
pascals of strength tensil strength to
do this. And this graphine has been
tested up to 120 gigap pascals of
strength. So it's it's very much capable
of doing the job. The biggest uh
drawback is that you have to have it's a
manufacturing drawback. You have to be
able to make a tether 100,000 miles long
with no brakes. So that's a little bit
of a challenge. You know, Tracy, like
when I think about the fact that human
or homoctus went 1.5 million years just
like making the handax when and then you
hear this and it's like whether it
happens in our lifetime, our kids'
lifetime, their kids' lifetime, that's
nothing like in the grand scheme of
history like which lifetime in the next
couple hundred years it happens in is
like truly an
>> matters to me. I want to see this.
>> I know. I want to see it too. But in for
our species, it's truly an irrelevant
rounding error. Exactly. And I do think,
you know, if rope is so crucial to all
of these breakthroughs in civilization
being able to sail the seas, then
naturally it probably is going to be an
important technology for getting to
other planets and so forth. Tim Queeny,
thank you so much for uh coming on
OddLaws. Fascinating conversation. I am
now convinced by your book's title that
rope is the backbone of civilization.
>> Thanks so much for having me. It was
really fun.
>> Tracy, that last point at the end, I I
have been thinking about this a lot that
like
we're just getting started here. You
know, we're like
50,000 years of just making the most
rudimentary rope out of twine, etc. And
now we find like the humans being able
to produce rope at industrial scale.
It's like it's like less than a minute
in in Earth time. You know what I'm
saying? Like we're just getting started.
And honestly, the idea that maybe in the
next thousand years, which is also
nothing, by the way, that we might get
into space with rope, it seems very
plausible to me.
>> Can I just say I got distracted cuz I
searched for graphine. Oh yeah. And
someone's making graphine design
earrings. They have the little like
hexogonal stamp on them. It's kind of
cool. No, not actually made out of
graphine, but
>> Oh, like the earrings the design of the
graphic. interlocking hexagons that Tim
was talking about. No, there is
something about rope where, you know,
>> we said this in the intro, but
>> it's old, it's ly. But on the other
hand, it's continuously being like
perfected and applied to different uses,
right? that core intuition
which Tim nicely demonst which I had not
thought about before but that core
intuition you wrap it around something
you take one strand and then you pull a
cord in the direction perpendicular or
or whatever uh with the direction of the
thing and it doesn't move is really
powerful right it's really simple but
it's also really powerful and the idea
that then okay the game is then to get
even more advanced material so you move
past jute get to something synthetic,
you go to steel and then maybe to
graphine. But that core simple fact that
when you twist something around
something, it becomes very durable is a
pretty like powerful conceptual unlock.
>> Well, also it avoids the single point of
failure problem that you see in
something like a chain. Yeah. But here's
a question. If if rope is the backbone
of civilization and cords are the
backbone of rope, then are cords the
backbone of civilization? [laughter]
Like how far take this? This is this is
the day which is and we just have to be
humble. It's like civilization has many
uh aunts and uncles. You know what I'm
saying? Many many many fathers and
mothers
>> string episode coming up soon. No, but
this you're you're totally right because
like I could argue it's like oh whales
are the you know whale oil but or but
you couldn't get there without the
whatever it is like all of these things
have various uh antecedants and then
unlocks right and so it's always sort of
helpful to understand uh I like these
history of technology things it makes me
makes me appreciate everything a little
bit more
>> yeah and I guess how iterative a lot of
it tends to be. There was um in the book
he talks about how what was the movie
with Tom Hanks and he's like on an
island and he has to
>> Oh, Castaway.
>> Yeah. And I guess he had to he had to
make some rope. Uh I forgot. I It's been
a long time since I saw that movie. I
feel like if I were on an island that
wouldn't occur to me like I would like I
wouldn't
>> But you'd have a lot of time to think
about it, Joe.
>> I bet I would never get there. I bet
[laughter] I You do not. Oh, I should
have twisted the fiber to make the butt.
I'd be like, "How do you do?" I bet like
that wouldn't Now, have you read the
book? Of course, it was different, but
had I not read the book, I think I would
have been pretty screwed.
>> I guess Robinson Crusoe has to be like
your next big read or something.
>> I should read that. I should read that.
>> Yeah. All right. Shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Check out Tim's
book, Rope. How a bundle of twisted
fibers became the backbone of
civilization. and follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Arman Dashel
Bennett at Dashbot and Kellbrooks at
Kellbrooks.
>> And for more Athoughts content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at
bloomberg.com/awthbots.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
247 with fellow listeners in our
Discord, discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation
about rope, then please leave a comment
or like the video, or better yet,
subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music]